# PHP Fundamentals: Introduction

## PHP : "Hypertext Preprocessor"


PHP is a **Backend** software, meaning that it runs on the _web server_ (whereas the **Frontend** designates the software acting on the side of the _client_ : the _browser_).

PHP enables the web server to **"think before speaking**". In Computer Sciences, "to think" means to calculate, process information. To speak means returning to the client (the browser from where originated the http request).
PHP can create responses in most formats: very often html, but also json, xml, css, javascript...

## Why use PHP to return something else ?

Because this allows you to create **dynamic** pages, rather than **static** ones.

For instance, imagine you wanted to create a web page that would say "Hello!" to each of the 7 billion inhabitants of our lovely planet.
If you had to create these pages statically, you would need to create 7 billion pages.

```HTML
<html>
<head>...</head>
<body><h1>Hello John Doe!</h1></body>
</html>
```

... it would take years, isn't it? Moreover, by the time you'd done making a thousand page, you would already have to delete some (for the deceased folks) and add some more (the babies born since you started your work)... That's not a good solution.

But what if you could separate the data from the display markup ?
You would fetch the data from a database and simply use one php file containing the markup and a variable receiving the person's name (via the url for example). That file would generate html containing a dynamic element.

One way to do it would be to populate the variable via the URL, like this:

http://.../index.php?name=John&lastname=Doe

```PHP
<html>
<head>...</head>
<body>
    <h1>Hello <?php echo $_GET['name'];?><?php echo $_GET['lastname'];?> !</h1>
</body>
</html>
```

You could then just send to each person its personal URL and done!

## What do we need for PHP to work ?

To properly understand what PHP does, it's useful to look at how a website works.

[Check a website](./assets/php-cours1-variables-et-conditions.pdf)

-   Browser --> requests yoursite.com.
-   Server prepares a response (e.g. looks for an index.php to load).
-   PHP is interpreted (= executed: if statements, loops, ...).
-   The resulting webpage is sent to the browser (= the response).
-   Browser receives the response and renders the html: shows text, loads images and executes any Javascript.

Ok, that's good, now how do we test it and what do we need to make it work :

-   A server + PHP
-   A database
-   User interface for database

We're going to install this

Next : [1.2 : Installation](./1.2-php-installation.md)
